---
layout: post
title: "A National and Indigenous Heritage: For Re-Enactment"
date: 2016-12-2 20:52:55 -0800
timecode: 11:49:00
categories: indigenous heritage
---
The film Extending Sweetness is shot outside of the National Domboshawa Rainmaking Cave - a site overseen by the National Museums and Monuments of Zimbabwe (NMMZ) and located 30 kilometers north of the capital of Harare.

The Domboshawa cave, like other caves around sub-Saharan Africa host rock imagery depicting San indigenous spiritual practices. But they are also merge with the indigenous spiritual practices of contemporary Shona living in the area prior to colonisation. The The rock images themselves show theriomorphism and spirit-figures called mudzimuzangara - to be repainted, and re-invoked prior to the rainmaking ceremonies (Ranger 1999; Garlake 1950; Monuments of S. Rhodesia).

However, the politics of heritage are evident in the management and creation of Domboshawa as a national rainmaking monument (see also Breglia 2009; Katsumudanga 2011). Since the NMMZ has taken control of the cave through a one-time opening ritual and subsequently through an adopt-a-site program run by the local school in exchange for the school kid’s free, once-a-year access (Tauravinga 2004) the site is no longer a spiritual shrine.  The NMMZ justifies the preservation of the cave in this way and against actual use based on two actions associated with rainmaking: 1) images meant to be repainted may not be repainted otherwise they will look too “new” to be old and not appeal to tourist’s sense of seeing a fossil in time. 2) fires always associated with rainmaking may not be built in the cave, under the chimney, lest they damage the image as well.

While the tangible heritage of Domboshowa and its’ geo-physical formation are preserved mostly for its’ aesthetic heritage, archeologist Murimbika (2009) argues that the “cultural meaning of rainmaking is not limited to the knowledge of the process” (194). Murimbika who explores the rainmaking traditions - based on archeological, archival, and oral evidence of four different regional/linguistic group in Southern Africa - seems to be calling the symbolic, cosmological representation of the technical, indigenous knowledge of rainmaking - mere epiphenomena. The number of variations on meaning exceed the variation on operations. But the ontology of weather, in reality, is no less patterned by cosmology or epistemology, than ecology is effected by human practices and behaviors.

Intangible heritage is then not a superfluous component of tangible heritage. Rather, intangible heritage constitutes the mind of practices and performances with hydrological, geophysical, faunal, meteorological, and floral natures. The patronizing attitude given to these practices is well-rehearsed however in international governmental organizations such the Food and Agricultural Organination which categorizes in documents on its website that all indigenous rainmaking done directly with elements is categorised as ‘magic’ or ‘pseudoscience’.

But the cave monuments’ “wind chimney” - nearly 10 feet high - does permit smoke from the fire (built in the amphitheater below) to reach, undispersed, a high enough altitude in the atmosphere where it can meet with colder cloud vapors, warm them, and then cause condensation to from around the smokes’ tiny particulate until the vapors are ‘full’ enough to rain - right there and then. The hic and nunc nature of the produced effects equate to a situated knowledge that is consistently underlooked by professional meteorological activities - trained mostly in prediction.

The Extending Sweetness film crew chose to contact NMMZ as partners on the film. Our goal was to re-enact the intangible heritage of rainmaking with them as overseers of the rainmaking monument. The NMMZ, on the other hand, was less cordial in spite of being present for meetings. Officers sought to charge the crew to film anywhere near the monument - even though they would not share any geographical guidelines as to the NMMZ’s precise jurisdiction. However, the crew gained clearance and offers of participation from the local chief, local rainmakers, and residents. Eddy K Paraziva (plays the grandfather in the film), also a local land-owner, was our first ‘character of place’ as he had grown up in Domboshawa and played in Rambakurima as a youth. In the director’s first scout of the area - Paraziva showed his extensive herbal knowledge of the place.

Through serendipity our film crew learned that the house with which we filmed - with the blue door - was the home of the present rainmakers - the Chadamoyo clan (the patriarch who plays ‘chief’ in the film). Through our various interactions and friendships with Domboshawa residents several anecdotes were told of local politics that informed both our story and our understanding of the significance of the heritage - tangible and intangible - in the film.

Firstly, locals had been sensitive about the NMMZ’s oversight of their cave and some were resentful of the private business surrounding the cave. The Cave Affair - a resort and restaurant surrounding the monument was one such one and its’ business tended to interrupt and overwhelm community decisions. Secondly, prior to our actual filming a series of murders has been blamed on the customary village rainmaker - sending her roaming before we got to meet her. The story evolved with the idea of a ‘roaming rainmaker’ - played by the aunt of Chipo - then in mind. Thirdly, the question of which religious heritage - Christian, indigenous, or syncretic Christian-indigenous propheta - is most amenable to the national secular policies governing the monument and the practices surrounding it forces cosmopolitical questions into the center of contemporary life.

For this reason our film’s form - docudrama - emerges from the way our research informed the script through which our cast and crew chose to enact the intangible heritage of rainmaking in Domboshowas as it is currently stands and is challenged.
