---
layout: post
title: "The Political Ecology of Color"
date: 2016-12-1 20:52:55 -0800
photo: "09_Political.jpg"
thumbnail: "09_Political_t.jpg"
timecode: "12:14:03"
categories: color sacred perception
---
Color, writes Michael Taussig in What Color is The Sacred? is fluid and moving. It is creaturely he argues if we restore its’ ontological being with temperature: _“to equate calor (heat) with color detaches us from a visual a approach to vision an makes color the cutting edge of such a shift.”_ In an indigenous Zimbabwean theory of difference, the constitution of being - or temperament - derives from temperature. This can be discerned from the perception of color. Shona classify and represent things - which are different by their temperature or temperament - in static color states.

For instance, the Shona ceremonial cheera (cloth) designed in a puff adder-ziz zag pattern represents as black or dark blue both ancestors and pregnant rain clouds (hore) which are topped or backgrounded by white - representing precipitation in white, fluffy clouds, and demarcated again from red lightening or fire zigs. The white clouds represents the normal condensation of precipitation as a process mediating between pregnancy/fullness (dark absorbs all colors) and redness (or heat) which is an activating element.

This thermal and fluid paradigm also pertains to perception of what is normal. Rain is seen to generate coolness, coolness generates health and fertility, which generate normalcy and prosperity. The largest contrast is then Drought - which generates heat. Heat generates death and barrenness from which comes abnormality and adversity. So starting from a point of cool water being good to the spectrum made by degrees where hot desiccation is a kind of pollution - we arrive at the Shona cosmological conception of its’ African Sabbath. During the Sabbath just before and slightly into the rainy season, hot, drying and human productive behaviors are anathema. The person who tills his fields before the rain makers perceives it is time for instance can expect their crops to be eaten by baboons because they are out of sync with the overall planning for the rain. Likewise, during the Sabbath rainmakers take care to heal the land with water medicines (mishonga remvura). A site hit by lightening, water polluted or an excessive focus on human or agricultural fertility rather than resting the land, the body, the spirit (kuwhozhera) requires interventions then.

In many cases, the mermaid spirit - represented by  blue, white and gold - are called into these ceremonial interventions. This is most likely because the njuzu is also known to be a healing spirit and she takes as acolytes either those who are ‘blue’ with depression or who are morally ‘cool’ in temperament. The colors blue and gold - correspond with the elements of water and light - to make green plants which participate in carbon dioxide exchange in order to process chlorophyll and make themselves sweet. It is said the njuzu likes sweet things and fermented wine as well as eggs. So the njuzu spirit ‘likes’ things perceived to be very pure and elemental. Being an aquatic being too, it notes that the ocean too inhales and exhales carbon dioxide in seasonal cycles that give plant’s breath and shape the atmosphere. So the njuzu also condenses the rainmakers sense of water, light, air as blue, white and gold, and their combinations - as sweet and green.
